src/main/asciidoc/java/index.adoc, before:

= Hazelcast Cluster Manager

This is a cluster manager implementation for Vert.x that uses http://hazelcast.com[Hazelcast].

It is the default cluster manager used in the Vert.x distribution, but it can be replaced with another implementation as Vert.x
cluster managers are pluggable.  This implementation is packaged inside:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.vertx</groupId>
  <artifactId>vertx-hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>3.3.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
----

In Vert.x a cluster manager is used for various functions including:

* Discovery and group membership of Vert.x nodes in a cluster
* Maintaining cluster wide topic subscriber lists (so we know which nodes are interested in which event bus addresses)
* Distributed Map support
* Distributed Locks
* Distributed Counters

Cluster managers *do not* handle the event bus inter-node transport, this is done directly by Vert.x with TCP connections.

== Using this cluster manager

If you are using Vert.x from the command line, the jar corresponding to this cluster manager (it will be named `vertx-hazelcast-${version}`.jar`
should be in the `lib` directory of the Vert.x installation.

If you want clustering with this cluster manager in your Vert.x Maven or Gradle project then just add a dependency to
the artifact: `io.vertx:vertx-hazelcast:${version}` in your project.

If the jar is on your classpath as above then Vert.x will automatically detect this and use it as the cluster manager.
Please make sure you don't have any other cluster managers on your classpath or Vert.x might
choose the wrong one.

You can also specify the cluster manager programmatically if you are embedding Vert.x by specifying it on the options
when you are creating your Vert.x instance, for example:

[source,java]
----
ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager();

VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);

Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

== Configuring this cluster manager

Usually the cluster manager is configured by a file
https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-hazelcast/blob/master/src/main/resources/default-cluster.xml[`default-cluster.xml`]
which is packaged inside the jar.

If you want to override this configuration you can provide a file called `cluster.xml` on your classpath and this
will be used instead. If you want to embed the `cluster.xml` file in a fat jar, it must be located at the root of the
fat jar. If it's an external file, the **directory** containing the file must be added to the classpath. For
example, if you are using the _launcher_ class from Vert.x, the classpath enhancement can be done as follows:

[source]
----
# If the cluster.xml is in the current directory:
java -jar ... -cp . -cluster
vertx run MyVerticle -cp . -cluster

# If the cluster.xml is in the conf directory
java -jar ... -cp conf -cluster
----

The xml file is a Hazelcast configuration file and is described in detail in the documentation on the Hazelcast
web-site.

**Note** Configuration of Hazelcast using the http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.6.1/manual/html-single/index.html#configuring-hazelcast[`-Dhazelcast.config`]
system property is not supported by Vert.x and should not be used.

You can also specify configuration programmatically if embedding:

[source,java]
----
Config hazelcastConfig = new Config();

// Now set some stuff on the config (omitted)

ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager(hazelcastConfig);

VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);

Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

Hazelcast supports several different transports including multicast and TCP. The default configuration uses
multicast so you must have multicast enabled on your network for this to work.

For full documentation on how to configure the transport differently or use a different transport please consult the
Hazelcast documentation.

== Using an existing Hazelcast cluster

You can pass an existing `HazelcastInstance` in the cluster manager to reuse an existing cluster:

[source,java]
----
ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager(hazelcastInstance);
VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);
Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

In this case, vert.x is not the cluster owner and so do not shutdown the cluster on close.

Notice that the custom Hazelcast instance need to be configured with:

[source, xml]
----
<map name="__vertx.subs">
  <backup-count>1</backup-count>
  <time-to-live-seconds>0</time-to-live-seconds>
  <max-idle-seconds>0</max-idle-seconds>
  <eviction-policy>NONE</eviction-policy>
  <max-size policy="PER_NODE">0</max-size>
  <eviction-percentage>25</eviction-percentage>
  <merge-policy>com.hazelcast.map.merge.LatestUpdateMapMergePolicy</merge-policy>
</map>
<semaphore name="__vertx.*">
  <initial-permits>1</initial-permits>
</semaphore>
----

**IMPORTANT** Do not use Hazelcast clients or smart clients when using high-availability (HA, or fail-over) in your
cluster as they do not notify when they leave the cluster and you may loose data, or leave the cluster in an
inconsistent state. See https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-hazelcast/issues/24 for more details.

== Trouble shooting clustering

If the default multicast configuration is not working here are some common causes:

=== Multicast not enabled on the machine.

It is quite common in particular on OSX machines for multicast to be disabled by default. Please google for
information on how to enable this.

=== Using wrong network interface

If you have more than one network interface on your machine (and this can also be the case if you are running
VPN software on your machine), then Hazelcast may be using the wrong one.

To tell Hazelcast to use a specific interface you can provide the IP address of the interface in the `interfaces`
element of the configuration. Make sure you set the `enabled` attribute to `true`. For example:

----
<interfaces enabled="true">
  <interface>192.168.1.20</interface>
</interfaces>
----

When running Vert.x is in clustered mode, you should also make sure that Vert.x knows about the correct interface.
When running at the command line this is done by specifying the `cluster-host` option:

----
vertx run myverticle.js -cluster -cluster-host your-ip-address
----

Where `your-ip-address` is the same IP address you specified in the Hazelcast configuration.

If using Vert.x programmatically you can specify this using
`link:../../apidocs/io/vertx/core/VertxOptions.html#setClusterHost-java.lang.String-[setClusterHost]`.

=== Using a VPN

This is a variation of the above case. VPN software often works by creating a virtual network interface which often
doesn't support multicast. If you have a VPN running and you do not specify the correct interface to use in both the
hazelcast configuration and to Vert.x then the VPN interface may be chosen instead of the correct interface.

So, if you have a VPN running you may have to configure both the Hazelcast and Vert.x to use the correct interface as
described in the previous section.

=== When multicast is not available

In some cases you may not be able to use multicast as it might not be available in your environment. In that case
you should configure another transport, e.g. TCP  to use TCP sockets, or AWS when running on Amazon EC2.

For more information on available Hazelcast transports and how to configure them please consult the Hazelcast
documentation.

=== Enabling logging

When trouble-shooting clustering issues with Hazelcast it's often useful to get some logging output from Hazelcast
to see if it's forming a cluster properly. You can do this (when using the default JUL logging) by adding a file
called `vertx-default-jul-logging.properties` on your classpath. This is a standard java.util.logging (JUL)
configuration file. Inside it set:

----
com.hazelcast.level=INFO
----

and also

----
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.level=INFO
java.util.logging.FileHandler.level=INFO
----

== Hazelcast logging

The logging backend used by Hazelcast is `jdk` by default (understand JUL). If you want to redirect the logging to
another library, you need to set the `hazelcast.logging.type` system property such as in:

----
-Dhazelcast.logging.type=slf4j
----

See the http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.6.1/manual/html-single/index.html#logging-configuration[hazelcast documentation] for more details.

== Using a different Hazelcast version

You may want to use a different version of Hazelcast. The default version is `3.6.2`. To do so, you
need to:

* put the version you want in the application classpath
* if you are running a fat jar, configure your build manager to use the right version

In this later case, you would need in Maven:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.hazelcast</groupId>
  <artifactId>hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>ENTER_YOUR_VERSION_HERE</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.vertx</groupId>
  <artifactId>vertx-hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>3.3.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
----

Depending on the version, you may need to exclude some transitive dependencies.

On Gradle, you can achieve the same overloading using:

[source]
----
dependencies {
 compile ("io.vertx:vertx-hazelcast:3.3.0-SNAPSHOT"){
   exclude group: 'com.hazelcast', module: 'hazelcast'
 }
 compile "com.hazelcast:hazelcast:ENTER_YOUR_VERSION_HERE"
}
----

Commit message:

Update documentation with support for 'hazelcast.config' system property

src/main/asciidoc/java/index.adoc, after:

= Hazelcast Cluster Manager

This is a cluster manager implementation for Vert.x that uses http://hazelcast.com[Hazelcast].

It is the default cluster manager used in the Vert.x distribution, but it can be replaced with another implementation as Vert.x
cluster managers are pluggable.  This implementation is packaged inside:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.vertx</groupId>
  <artifactId>vertx-hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>3.3.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
----

In Vert.x a cluster manager is used for various functions including:

* Discovery and group membership of Vert.x nodes in a cluster
* Maintaining cluster wide topic subscriber lists (so we know which nodes are interested in which event bus addresses)
* Distributed Map support
* Distributed Locks
* Distributed Counters

Cluster managers *do not* handle the event bus inter-node transport, this is done directly by Vert.x with TCP connections.

== Using this cluster manager

If you are using Vert.x from the command line, the jar corresponding to this cluster manager (it will be named `vertx-hazelcast-${version}`.jar`
should be in the `lib` directory of the Vert.x installation.

If you want clustering with this cluster manager in your Vert.x Maven or Gradle project then just add a dependency to
the artifact: `io.vertx:vertx-hazelcast:${version}` in your project.

If the jar is on your classpath as above then Vert.x will automatically detect this and use it as the cluster manager.
Please make sure you don't have any other cluster managers on your classpath or Vert.x might
choose the wrong one.

You can also specify the cluster manager programmatically if you are embedding Vert.x by specifying it on the options
when you are creating your Vert.x instance, for example:

[source,java]
----
ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager();

VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);

Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

== Configuring this cluster manager

Usually the cluster manager is configured by a file
https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-hazelcast/blob/master/src/main/resources/default-cluster.xml[`default-cluster.xml`]
which is packaged inside the jar.

If you want to override this configuration you can provide a file called `cluster.xml` on your classpath and this
will be used instead. If you want to embed the `cluster.xml` file in a fat jar, it must be located at the root of the
fat jar. If it's an external file, the **directory** containing the file must be added to the classpath. For
example, if you are using the _launcher_ class from Vert.x, the classpath enhancement can be done as follows:

[source]
----
# If the cluster.xml is in the current directory:
java -jar ... -cp . -cluster
vertx run MyVerticle -cp . -cluster

# If the cluster.xml is in the conf directory
java -jar ... -cp conf -cluster
----

Another way to override the configuration is by providing the system property `hazelcast.config` with a location:

[source]
----
# Use a cluster configuration located in an external file
java -Dhazelcast.config=./config/my-cluster-config.xml -jar ... -cluster

# Or use a custom configuration from the classpath
java -Dhazelcast.config=classpath:my/package/config/my-cluster-config.xml -jar ... -cluster
----

The `hazelcast.config` system property, when present, overrides any `cluster.xml` on the classpath, but if loading
from this system property fails, then loading falls back to either `cluster.xml` or the Hazelcast default configuration.

The xml file is a Hazelcast configuration file and is described in detail in the documentation on the Hazelcast
web-site.

**Note** Configuration of Hazelcast using the http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.6.1/manual/html-single/index.html#configuring-hazelcast[`-Dhazelcast.config`]
system property is not supported by Vert.x and should not be used.

You can also specify configuration programmatically if embedding:

[source,java]
----
Config hazelcastConfig = new Config();

// Now set some stuff on the config (omitted)

ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager(hazelcastConfig);

VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);

Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

Hazelcast supports several different transports including multicast and TCP. The default configuration uses
multicast so you must have multicast enabled on your network for this to work.

For full documentation on how to configure the transport differently or use a different transport please consult the
Hazelcast documentation.

== Using an existing Hazelcast cluster

You can pass an existing `HazelcastInstance` in the cluster manager to reuse an existing cluster:

[source,java]
----
ClusterManager mgr = new HazelcastClusterManager(hazelcastInstance);
VertxOptions options = new VertxOptions().setClusterManager(mgr);
Vertx.clusteredVertx(options, res -> {
  if (res.succeeded()) {
    Vertx vertx = res.result();
  } else {
    // failed!
  }
});
----

In this case, vert.x is not the cluster owner and so do not shutdown the cluster on close.

Notice that the custom Hazelcast instance need to be configured with:

[source, xml]
----
<map name="__vertx.subs">
  <backup-count>1</backup-count>
  <time-to-live-seconds>0</time-to-live-seconds>
  <max-idle-seconds>0</max-idle-seconds>
  <eviction-policy>NONE</eviction-policy>
  <max-size policy="PER_NODE">0</max-size>
  <eviction-percentage>25</eviction-percentage>
  <merge-policy>com.hazelcast.map.merge.LatestUpdateMapMergePolicy</merge-policy>
</map>
<semaphore name="__vertx.*">
  <initial-permits>1</initial-permits>
</semaphore>
----

**IMPORTANT** Do not use Hazelcast clients or smart clients when using high-availability (HA, or fail-over) in your
cluster as they do not notify when they leave the cluster and you may loose data, or leave the cluster in an
inconsistent state. See https://github.com/vert-x3/vertx-hazelcast/issues/24 for more details.

== Trouble shooting clustering

If the default multicast configuration is not working here are some common causes:

=== Multicast not enabled on the machine.

It is quite common in particular on OSX machines for multicast to be disabled by default. Please google for
information on how to enable this.

=== Using wrong network interface

If you have more than one network interface on your machine (and this can also be the case if you are running
VPN software on your machine), then Hazelcast may be using the wrong one.

To tell Hazelcast to use a specific interface you can provide the IP address of the interface in the `interfaces`
element of the configuration. Make sure you set the `enabled` attribute to `true`. For example:

----
<interfaces enabled="true">
  <interface>192.168.1.20</interface>
</interfaces>
----

When running Vert.x is in clustered mode, you should also make sure that Vert.x knows about the correct interface.
When running at the command line this is done by specifying the `cluster-host` option:

----
vertx run myverticle.js -cluster -cluster-host your-ip-address
----

Where `your-ip-address` is the same IP address you specified in the Hazelcast configuration.

If using Vert.x programmatically you can specify this using
`link:../../apidocs/io/vertx/core/VertxOptions.html#setClusterHost-java.lang.String-[setClusterHost]`.

=== Using a VPN

This is a variation of the above case. VPN software often works by creating a virtual network interface which often
doesn't support multicast. If you have a VPN running and you do not specify the correct interface to use in both the
hazelcast configuration and to Vert.x then the VPN interface may be chosen instead of the correct interface.

So, if you have a VPN running you may have to configure both the Hazelcast and Vert.x to use the correct interface as
described in the previous section.

=== When multicast is not available

In some cases you may not be able to use multicast as it might not be available in your environment. In that case
you should configure another transport, e.g. TCP  to use TCP sockets, or AWS when running on Amazon EC2.

For more information on available Hazelcast transports and how to configure them please consult the Hazelcast
documentation.

=== Enabling logging

When trouble-shooting clustering issues with Hazelcast it's often useful to get some logging output from Hazelcast
to see if it's forming a cluster properly. You can do this (when using the default JUL logging) by adding a file
called `vertx-default-jul-logging.properties` on your classpath. This is a standard java.util.loging (JUL)
configuration file. Inside it set:

----
com.hazelcast.level=INFO
----

and also

----
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.level=INFO
java.util.logging.FileHandler.level=INFO
----

== Hazelcast logging

The logging backend used by Hazelcast is `jdk` by default (understand JUL). If you want to redirect the logging to
another library, you need to set the `hazelcast.logging.type` system property such as in:

----
-Dhazelcast.logging.type=slf4j
----

See the http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.6.1/manual/html-single/index.html#logging-configuration[hazelcast documentation] for more details.

== Using a different Hazelcast version

You may want to use a different version of Hazelcast. The default version is `3.6.2`. To do so, you
need to:

* put the version you want in the application classpath
* if you are running a fat jar, configure your build manager to use the right version

In this later case, you would need in Maven:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.hazelcast</groupId>
  <artifactId>hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>ENTER_YOUR_VERSION_HERE</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.vertx</groupId>
  <artifactId>vertx-hazelcast</artifactId>
  <version>3.3.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
----

Depending on the version, you may need to exclude some transitive dependencies.

On Gradle, you can achieve the same overloading using:

[source]
----
dependencies {
 compile ("io.vertx:vertx-hazelcast:3.3.0-SNAPSHOT"){
   exclude group: 'com.hazelcast', module: 'hazelcast'
 }
 compile "com.hazelcast:hazelcast:ENTER_YOUR_VERSION_HERE"
}
----
